= cs

Computer Science Module for Ruby

This is an ambitious gem in which we hope to provide useful computer science algorithms.
The first version is very small, offering two algorithms to compute Fibonacci numbers.
We did this as an exercise in writing good Ruby code, as well as learning how to provide
real, useful libraries as gems.

Here are the two Fibonacci algorithms currently supported:

[Matrix exponentiation]  This is the fastest way we have found to compute Fibonacci numbers.
It makes use of the fact that if M = Matrix[[0, 1], [1, 1]], then the lower right element of
M**k contains the (k + 1)'th Fibonacci number.  This is very fast if the Matrix.** operation
is optimized to use successive squaring rather than individual multiplications.  Ruby's
implementation of Matrix.** does exactly this, fortunately.

[While loop]  This is a simple loop that computes F(n) by adding F(0) + F(1) + ... + F(n - 1).
For n < 5000, this seems to perform about as well as the matrix exponentiation.  But, thereafter
it is MUCH slower (at least, in the benchmarks we performed).

= Using the library

The algorithms are available in two forms.  The basic form is a module method:

  require 'rubygems'
  require 'cs'
  y = CS::fibonacci(6) # returns F(6) which is 8 = 5 + 3, using default algorithm

An optional parameter selects the algorithm to be used.  By default, the matrix
exponentiation algorithm is used.  However, you can choose one or the other as follows:

  y_more_slowly = CS::fibonacci(6, CS::FIBONACCI_WHILE_LOOP)

As a convenience, the method is also available as an instance mixin for the class Integer:

  require 'rubygems'
  require 'cs_fibonacci'
  y = 6.fibonacci # use default algorithm
  y_slower = 6.fibonacci(CS::FIBONACCI_WHILE_LOOP)

== Obtaining the gem from github

gem sources -a http://gems.github.com
gem install dgoldhirsch-cs

== Extensions to Standard Library

While coding these algorithms, we found it useful to code an extension to the
standard Ruby Matrix class, to obtain the lower right element of a matrix.
It may be that this is already available in one of the existing Ruby extension
gems--but, for now, we included it in the CS module on the chance that
someone else might want to make use of it:

  require 'rubygems'
  require 'cs'
  y = CS::lower_right(Matrix[[1, 2], [3, 4]]) # y is 4

== This is Still Half-Baked

Obviously, this is a beginner's gem which is in an infant state.  Comments and
suggestions are very welcome.  As a companion to the gem, we'll try to create
a Web site that demonstrates the algorithms and which solicits additional algorithm
contributions and suggestions.   We'll update this document when/if we are able
to finish that.

== Copyright

Copyright (c) 2009 David C. Goldhirsch. See LICENSE for details.
